# FAA LAANC Performance Rules 7.0.2

This file summarizes a subset of requirements from the LAANC 7.0.2 Performance Rules.

### <tt>3,1a</tt>

The USS must manage sUAS authorizations as a service to operators.

### <tt>3,2,1a</tt>

The USS must conform to the USS-FAA LAANC API  Specification version in effect. This includes details on connecting to the FAA’s LAANC system via the Internet. The FAA provides the USS-FAA LAANC API Specification to USSs as part of the LAANC onboarding process. Attachment A– USS-FAA High-Level Exchange Model” provides an overview of the major data items transferred over the APIs. USS-FAA information transmission is bidirectional and secure. As part of USS-FAA LAANC API Specification compliance, the USS must implement and maintain the interface capabilities defined by the USS-FAA LAANC API Specification, including the ability to receive secure real-time messages from the FAA.

### <tt>3,3,1a</tt>

The USS must apply the appropriate UASFM(s) to each operation. Basemap data includes the definition of UASFM grid cells. UASFM values (such as altitude limits and flags) may change on a daily timeframe, especially to expedite map corrections or time-sensitive adjustments.

### <tt>3,3,3a</tt>

The USS must subdivide a single operational volume in controlled airspace into multiple authorization submissions only for the enumerated reasons listed above.

(see Performance Rules document for reasons list)

### <tt>3,4,1a</tt>

The auto-approved authorization process must not be considered complete until a confirming digital response is received from the FAA as described in the USS-FAA LAANC API Specification.

### <tt>3,4,3b</tt>

The USS must determine the correct facility to which to submit authorization-related messages. The correct algorithm for doing this is described by the enumerated steps below. USSs may implement these steps or an equivalent, alternative process that produces the same result. This algorithm is to be used for the Facility Determination for all authorization-related messages.

(see algorithm in Performance Rules document)

### <tt>3,4,6b</tt>

The USS must make the reference code available to the operator. Reference codes will be used in the event there is a need to communicate directly with the operator or if the USS needs to interact with the FAA in any capacity.

### <tt>3,4,7a</tt>

The USS must offer the capability to modify the details of a planned operation if such change does not invalidate the authorization or require Air Traffic Further Coordination.

### <tt>3,7c</tt>

USSs must implement the following filtering:

Block any submissions associated with a new operation if there are already five (or more) non-pending operations for the same operator (name and phone number) occurring with an overlapping time period. A message should be generated to inform the user of the reason for the block.

### <tt>3,7d</tt>

USSs must implement the following filtering:

Block submissions (automatic or Further Coordination) that are more than 100 nautical miles from an existing non-pending operation for the same operator (name and phone number) for an overlapping time period. Specifically, two operation volumes are more than 100 nautical miles apart if the nearest points between the two volumes are a distance greater than 100 nautical miles from each other. A message should be generated to inform the user of the reason for the block.

### <tt>3,7e</tt>

If a new submission is made when there is one (or more) non-pending operations for the same operator (name and phone number) occurring with an overlapping time period, the USS must display a message to user that there are one or more operations for this operator and time period and unused operations should be cancelled before the operation start time.
